# Express Boilerplate

This is a boilerplate project used for starting new projects!

## Set Up: 
Use CLI for running commands listed below

### I. Clone Repo: Git Clone, npm install, .env variables
Complete the following steps to start a new project (NEW-PROJECT-NAME):

1. Clone this repository to your local machine `git clone BOILERPLATE-URL NEW-PROJECTS-NAME`
2. `cd` into the cloned repository
3. Make a fresh start of the git history for this project with `rm -rf .git && git init`
4. In the example.env file, rename the values of the following: MIGRATION_DB_NAME, DATABASE_URL, TEST_DATABASE_URL  
5. Edit the contents of the `package.json` to change "name" and "description"
6. Install the node dependencies `npm install`  
7. Move the example Environment file to `.env` that will be ignored by git and read by the express server `mv example.env .env`

### II. Create New Project Github Repo 
1. Open github and create a new repo
2. Follow the instructions, making the first commit and push of the new project to github
`git init`  
`git add . `  
`git commit -m "first commit"`  
`git remote add origin https://github.com/username/repo-name.git`  
`git push -u origin master`

### III. Initial API Tests
1. Type `npm run dev` to run API on local machine
2. Open Postman. 
3. Set url request to: http://localhost:9000/test (or whatever port is listed on the console when you entered `npm run dev`, and add: `/test`)
4. Set Headers `Key` - `Authorization`, `Value` - `Bearer 1234`. This should return `{ok: true}`  
*1234 is the default API_KEY specified in the .env file, this will eventually need to be changed

### IV. Create, Migrate and Seed Local Database
NOTE: The steps below create, migrate, and seed a database based off the default files from boilerplate-api. You will need to create new files for migrations and seeds, as well as /src folders, with router and service files, for each table.  
1. Open psql, `psql postgres`
2. Create databse, `create database name_of_database;`
3. Migrate database with `npm run migrate` 
4. Seed database `psql -f ~/Projects/boilerplate-api/seeds/seed.all.sql boilerplate;`  
*Note that the file and database should be changed to match the current project file and database*
5. Test GET on Postman to make sure you can retrieve items recently added to database:  
URL: http://localhost:9000/api/articles  
Set Headers `Key` - `Authorization`, `Value` - `Bearer 1234`.

### V. New Tables: Migrations, Seeding, Router, and Service
The following instructions will use an example case. The example case is to add a table named "department" to the API.  
The table will have two columns, "name" and "department_id".
1. In the `/migrations` directory, create the file `001.do.create_department.sql` 
2. Define the table with the following:  
```
  CREATE TABLE department(
  department_id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY GENERATED BY DEFAULT AS IDENTITY,
  name TEXT NOT NULL,
  );  
```

3. In the `/seeds` directory, create the file `001.seed.department.sql` 
4. Create the seed by pasting the following:  
```
TRUNCATE department RESTART
IDENTITY CASCADE;

INSERT INTO department
    (name)
VALUES
    ('department 1'),
    ('department 2'),
    ('department 3'),
    ('department 4'); 

```

5. In the `/src` directory add a subdirectory titled `departments`. So the path would be `/src/departments`  
6. In the `/src/departments/` directory, create two files:  
`/src/departments/router`  
`/src/departments/service`  
*NOTE: You can also copy and paste the `/src/boilerplate-endpoints` directory. Steps 5-6 clarify how to do this manually.* 
7. In `/src/departments/departments-service`, assign the variable tableName to "department" and modify the getById function. See below for example code: 
```
    const tableName = "department"; 
```

```
    getById(knex, id) {
    return knex.from(tableName).select("*").where("department_id", id).first();
  },
```
  
8. In `/src/departments/departments-router`, find the sections that need to be rewritten by searching for "REWRITE" in the comments and changing them to match the column names for department.  
9. In `/src/app.js/` add the router:  
  const departmentsRouter = require('./departments/departments-router')
10. In `/src/app.js/` direct the app to use the router: 
```
  app.use(validateBearerToken)  
```

```
app.use(validateBearerToken);
app.use("/api/departments", departmentsRouter);
```


### V. Deploy API to Heroku and Set API Token 
1. When your new project is ready for deployment, add a new Heroku application with `heroku create`.   
*This will make a new git remote called "heroku"
2. Deploy to heroku with `git push heroku master`
3. Generate a new UUID (https://www.uuidgenerator.net/) to use as your production API key and copy it. Now we can set it in Heroku using the following command: `heroku config:set API_TOKEN=paste-your-token-here`   
4. Test that the API Key works in Postman, by entering `https://NAME-OF-APP-HERE.herokuapp.com/test`, and change the Headers to include: Key: `Authorization`, Value `Bearer UUID-Random-Text-Random-Numbers`
5. You can view the API Key on the heroku website, click on the name of your heroku app, go to settings, scroll down to Config Vars

### VI. Provision, Deploy and Migrate Database to Heroku
1. Provision the database, type `heroku addons:create heroku-postgresql:hobby-dev`.  
*hobby-dev is the heroku plan 
2. Connect to the client `psql <connection url>`  
* In the place of the `<connection url>` type the actual connection url. To get the url, type `heroku pg:credentials:url` and look for the string after the `connection url:` it should read something like `postgres://very_long_string_numbers_etc.`
3. You can connect to the heroku database, and run psql commands, with `heroku pg:psql` 
4. Migrate the database, `npm run migrate:production`.  
*the boilerplate-api project also has a `"predeploy": "npm audit && npm run migrate:production"` script, so typing `npm run deploy` will also migrate the database to heroku



## Scripts



## Deploying



## Updating
You should be updating both github and Heroku on a regular basis. 

Push new updates from your local machine to github to save your work remotely.
When ready to deploy updates, push updates from your local machine to heroku. 

